Brains are highly fashionable. A very common belief is that the human mind and cognition lie in the head, within the confines of a spongy greyish organ called ‘the brain’ encased within skull and skin. While I was looking at that Thinker’s head, with my stomach protesting, I realised I had completely dismissed his body. I was obsessed with understanding his mind, and my mind via his brain, but I completely ignored the rest of him. Like the great majority of scientists and philosophers throughout history, I too was putting cognition into the head and forgetting about the body, treating it as something that got in the way of pure cerebral thought.

Being a philosopher hadn’t been my only dream.

Why are we so reluctant to consider the brain as just another part of the body?

I’d decided to study philosophy after becoming a frustrated musician. My parents, God bless them, considered that singing opera and playing piano were cool ways to impress the visitors, but wouldn’t lead to a career. Now they regret their decision not to allow me to take a musical path. When visitors politely ask what their daughter is doing for a living and they reply: ‘She’s a philosopher,’ the visitors look puzzled as if needing an extra explanation: ‘Yes, but what exactly is she doing?’ My parents can’t say ‘she’s thinking’ because that would make them look silly, and they are extremely proud and reasonable folks. Now, if I were a musician, well, that would have been way simpler. Everyone gets what musicians do.

There is no doubt a modern fascination with the thinking brain as the fundamental basis of human cognition. But why? Is this the only entrance point that allows us to understand who we are and what human cognition is? Here I propose another angle. While neurons are indeed fascinating, their complex activity is only part of the story of human cognition.

After all, brains are part of the body, and bodies are made of cells and many other constituents, some of which are not literally ours, like our unique DNA is. There are many ‘Brain and Body’ research institutes around the world, but no ‘Liver and Body’ institutes. Why is that? It’s because we think the liver is (part) of the body. But why are we so reluctant to consider the brain as just another part of the body? There’s no evidence that the brain is made of a different kind of ‘physical stuff’ from the rest of the body.

I propose a shift in focus from neural to cellular processing to highlight the fundamental role of cells in constituting biological self-organising systems such as the human body.

The journey of understanding who we are, scientifically and philosophically, starts traditionally with a thinking guy – yes, it’s usually a guy, a solitary male genius – sorting out the mystery of the Universe from within his ivory tower. Yet, the journey of who we are as living beings starts way before, when a couple of cells start negotiating energetic resources with some other bunch of cells in the depths of a womb.

As a philosopher/frustrated musician/cognitive neuroscientist, I now give academic talks all over the world, and one of my favourite things to do is to say the following line while carefully scanning the audience for their reactions: ‘You have all spent time growing inside another person’s body.’ Most of the time, people’s eyes widen as if some big mystery has just been revealed to them. Some nod their heads, others seem perplexed or in denial. But surely these smart academics know that babies don’t just drop from the sky or pop out from cabbages? As adults, we all know that we have been babies ourselves, and that we have all developed inside another person’s body. Why is this biological and scientific fact so difficult to recognise for our intelligentsia? Why are we so obsessed with minds, with pure self-conscious minds, while forgetting about bodies, and specifically about the other body that carried and fed our own one? Just think about it: long before being these lovely adults with hopes and dreams and failures, drinking coffee, paying taxes, and reading fancy books and articles online, each of us spent some time as a single cell.

Even more mind-blowing: all human beings gradually develop from cells to a human body within another human body. Pregnancy is a universal human fact that concerns everyone, not just a few of us. All cells of the human organism originate from a single cell, the zygote, are closely interconnected, mutually influence one another, and operate in synchrony to achieve common goals – maintenance of homeostasis and constant adaptation to changes of the surrounding environment. This means that we arrive into this world not on a solitary rock dropped by some mastermind, but as living biological creatures deeply dependent upon and connected with another living body. And then we need others to take care of us for quite some time before we can find a rock to sit on and think about deep things like the meaning of life or quantum physics.

For that Thinker to contemplate the meaning of life, he has to self-regulate his humble internal bodily states

To understand minds, we need to grasp first how we become minds. We need to start with the cells that compose our humble toes before zooming into the mystery of the brain. Why? Because our cells solve the biggest and most urgent problem of this great and mysterious adventure called life without a brain, and before we had a brain: how to stay alive.

Humans are living creatures. Living creatures are self-organising biological systems whose bodies constantly perform the humble yet essential, basic task of keeping track of self-related information-processing to secure survival. In short, this means that your body works for you even when you are asleep or under anaesthesia: your heart keeps beating for you, not for someone else. This also means that all bodily processes have the self at their very core, simply because they obey the universal drive governing all living systems which is: don’t die! Self-preservation is fundamental. But because our body is a living system governed by the basic law of self-preservation, this means that all our experiences are necessarily embodied self-experiences. In perceiving and experiencing the world, we ‘smuggle in’ our own fundamental self-survival goals. This is something we share with cats and worms and viruses. Whether this is also something we share with artificial systems is another story.

Bodily experiences are thus necessarily connected to biological self-regulation (or homeostasis) and self-preservation. For example, a penguin can survive in very cold temperatures, while humans can’t. Every organism has a set of optimal states it has to maintain in order to stay alive. If you are too cold, or too hot, or you need to go to the loo, or you are hungry and dream of salads, then you can’t think properly and solve complex abstract problems. For that Thinker to be able to contemplate the meaning of life on a rock, first he has to successfully self-regulate his humble internal bodily states. In short, the body is life – it is the sine qua non of human existence. If one is alive, one is experiencing through one’s body, even when asleep, even under anaesthesia. And this very simple idea is crucial for redefining how we understand cognition.

How?

Let’s forget for a moment the Thinker, static and isolated on his pedestal, and go back to the growing or developing thinker. How did she get there in the first place? What is this thinker made of? Is she hungry or upset? All these questions may seem silly or irrelevant for the noble question ‘What is cognition?’ but here I suggest that, actually, it’s quite the opposite.

To understand how the neurons work and how we get from neurons to minds, we first need to get back to square one, to understand how we get from cells to selves.

